Not a path pattern expression (#1431)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/expressions/predicates/label-expression-predicates.adoc

= Label expression predicates
:description: This page describes how to use label expression predicates with Cypher.

> A label expression predicate can be used to verify that the labels of a node or the relationship type of a relationship matches a given label expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use a label expression predicate to verify that the labels of a node or the relationship type of a relationship match a given label expression.
```

[[label-expression-predicat-syntax]]
== Syntax

[source, syntax]
----
<expr>:<label-expression>
----

Where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<label-expression>` is any Cypher xref::patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expression].

[[example-graph]]
== Example graph

> The following graph is used for the examples below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following graph is used for the examples on this page:
```

image::label_expression_predicates_graph.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

To recreate the graph, run the following query against an empty Neo4j database:

[source, cypher]
----
CREATE (alice:Person&Manager {name:'Alice', age: 65, skills: ['Java', 'Python']}),
       (cecil:Person&Developer {name: 'Cecil', age: 25, skills: ['Java', 'Python']}),
       (cecilia:Person&Developer {name: 'Cecilia', age: 31, skills: ['JavaScript', 'TypeScript']}),
       (charlie:Person&Engineer {name: 'Charlie', age: 61, skills: ['C++', 'Python']}),
       (daniel:Person&Director {name: 'Daniel', age: 39, skills: ['JavaScript', 'Slides']}),
       (eskil:Person&CEO {name: 'Eskil', age: 39, skills: ['Slides', 'ChatGPT']}),

       (cecil)-[:WORKS_FOR]->(alice),
       (cecilia)-[:WORKS_FOR]->(alice),
       (charlie)-[:WORKS_FOR]->(daniel),
       (alice)-[:REPORTS_TO]->(daniel),
       (daniel)-[:REPORTS_TO]->(eskil)
----

[node-label-expression-predicate]

> == Test that node has a certain labels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Test whether a node has a certain label
```

> Given `p` is a node, `p:Manager` tests whether node `p` has the label `Manager` or not and results in `true` or `false`, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given that `p` is a node, `p:Manager` tests whether `p` has the label `Manager` or not and results in `true` or `false`, respectively.
```

> // tag::node-label-expression-predicate-1[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// tag::node-label-expression-predicate-simple[]
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)
RETURN p.name AS name, p:Manager AS isManager
----

> // end::node-label-expression-predicate-1[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// end::node-label-expression-predicate-simple[]
```

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | isManager

| "Alice" | true
| "Cecil" | false
| "Cecilia" | false
| "Charlie" | false
| "Daniel" | false
| "Eskil" | false

2+d|Rows: 6
|===

> Given `p` is a node and a more complex xref::patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expression], e.g, `Manager|Director|CEO`, `p:Manager|Director|CEO` tests whether node `p` matches the label expression `Manager|Director|CEO` or not and results in `true` or `false`, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given that `p` is a node and a more complex xref::patterns/reference.adoc#label-expressions[label expression], e.g, `Manager|Director|CEO`, `p:Manager|Director|CEO` tests whether node `p` matches the label expression `Manager|Director|CEO` or not and results in `true` or `false`, respectively.
```

More specifically, `p:Manager|Director|CEO` tests whether `p` has at least one of the three labels `Manager`, `Director`, and `CEO`.

> // tag::node-label-expression-predicate-2[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// tag::node-label-expression-predicate-or[]
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)
RETURN p.name AS name,
       p:Manager|Director|CEO AS isManager
----

> // end::node-label-expression-predicate-2[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// end::node-label-expression-predicate-or[]
```

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | isManager

| "Alice" | true
| "Cecil" | false
| "Cecilia" | false
| "Charlie" | false
| "Daniel" | true
| "Eskil" | true

2+d|Rows: 6
|===

`p:!CEO` tests whether `p` does not have the label `CEO`.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[r]->(m)
RETURN p.name AS name,
       m:!CEO AS doesNotWorkDirectlyForTheCEO

> ----

Reviewer: no tags for this node-label-expression-predicate?

Author: I never the remember the purpose of the tags. I thought they mark which examples go into the cheat sheet, so I picked just some of them. But maybe the cheat sheet things was somethings else. If all need a tag, then so be it.

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | doesNotWorkDirectlyForTheCEO

| "Alice" | true
| "Cecil" | true
| "Cecilia" | true
| "Charlie" | true
| "Daniel" | false

2+d|Rows: 5
|===

> When '<exp>', then the label expression predicate results in `null`, e.g. if `p` is `null`, then `p:!CEO` results in `null`.

Reviewer 2: It feels like something is missing here, it should not say just When '\<exp\>' right?

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)
OPTIONAL MATCH (p)-[r]->(m)
RETURN p.name AS name,
       m:!CEO AS doesNotWorkDirectlyForTheCEO
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | doesNotWorkDirectlyForTheCEO

| "Alice" | true
| "Cecil" | true
| "Cecilia" | true
| "Charlie" | true
| "Daniel" | false
| "Eskil" | null

2+d|Rows: 6
|===

> The function xref:functions/scalar.adoc#functions-coalesce[coalesce] allows to turn a `null` into a default values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function xref:functions/scalar.adoc#functions-coalesce[coalesce] allows to turn `null` into a default value:
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)
OPTIONAL MATCH (p)-[r]->(m)
RETURN p.name AS name,
       coalesce(m:!CEO, false) AS doesNotWorkDirectlyForTheCEO
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | doesNotWorkDirectlyForTheCEO

| "Alice" | true
| "Cecil" | true
| "Cecilia" | true
| "Charlie" | true
| "Daniel" | false
| "Eskil" | false

2+d|Rows: 6
|===

[role=label--new-Neo4j-2025.07 label--cypher-25-only]
[[dynamic-node-label-expression-predicate]]

> == Test that node matches dynamic label expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Test whether a node matches a dynamic label expression
```

> If we do not know the manager labels, we can infer a list of `managerLabels` by collecting all non-`Person` labels from people with a direct report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't know the manager labels, you can infer a list of `managerLabels` by collecting all non-`Person` labels from people with a direct report.
```

> Nodes can be tested with the label expression predicate to match xref:patterns/reference.adoc#dynamic-label-and-type-expressions[dynamic label expression].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can test nodes with the label expression predicate to match a xref:patterns/reference.adoc#dynamic-label-and-type-expressions[dynamic label expression].
```

> `p:$any(managerLabels)` test whether node `p` has at least on of the label in the list `managerLabels`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`p:$any(managerLabels)` tests whether a node `p` has at least on of the label in the list `managerLabels`.
```

[source, cypher]
----
CYPHER 25
MATCH ()-[r]->(p:Person)
UNWIND labels(p) AS label
FILTER label <> "Person"
RETURN COLLECT(label) AS managerLabels
NEXT
MATCH (p)
RETURN p.name AS name, p:$any(managerLabels) AS isManager

> ----

Reviewer 2: Nice query :)

> ----

Reviewer: again, no tags? (not sure how many we need for the cheat sheet :thinking: )

Author: So I remembered correctly that they are for the cheat sheet. The ones with tags are my picks. But please, just take them as uninformed suggestions. I have no higher understanding of what typically is expected to go into the cheat sheet. I am just running on very basic subjective assumptions. Feel free to adjust that.

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | isManager

| "Alice" | true
| "Cecil" | false
| "Cecilia" | false
| "Charlie" | false
| "Daniel" | true
| "Eskil" | true

2+d|Rows: 6
|===

[node-label-expression-predicate]

> == Test that relationship has a certain relationship type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Test whether a relationship has a certain relationship type
```

> Given `r` is a relationship, `r:WORKS_FOR` tests whether `r` has the relationship type `WORKS_FOR` or not and result in `true` or `false`, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given that `r` is a relationship, `r:WORKS_FOR` tests whether `r` has the relationship type `WORKS_FOR` or not and result in `true` or `false`, respectively.
```

Given `r` is a relationship, `r:WORKS_FOR` tests whether `r` has the relationship type `WORKS_FOR` or not and result in `true` or `false`, respectively.

// tag::relationship-label-expression-predicate[]
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[r]->()
RETURN p.name AS name,
       r:WORKS_FOR AS isNotManager
----
// end::relationship-label-expression-predicate[]

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | isNotManager

| "Alice" | false
| "Cecil" | true
| "Cecilia" | true
| "Charlie" | true
| "Daniel" | false

2+d|Rows: 5
|===

> If `r` is `null`, then the label expression predicate, e.g. `r:WORKS_FOR|REPORTS_TO` results in `null`.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps you should add the sentence about using coalesce to change nulls to default values here as well. Having read the whole page it is clear, but if someone is looking at this example only it might be a bit confusing that this sentence mentions null and the result below does not

> If `r` is `null`, then the label expression predicate, e.g. `r:WORKS_FOR|REPORTS_TO` results in `null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `r` is `null`, then the label expression predicate, e.g. `r:WORKS_FOR|REPORTS_TO`, results in `null`.
```

> The function xref:functions/scalar.adoc#functions-coalesce[coalesce] allows to turn a `null` into a default values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function xref:functions/scalar.adoc#functions-coalesce[coalesce] allows to turn `null` into a default value.
```
